Already a mess - we are all in trouble

If last night was day one of the government - then we are all in trouble.

Winston Peters opens with a dissertation on how the world is coming to an end, and it won't be the new government's fault. Then he picks Labour, who didn't know, and in the line of the night Jacinda Ardern tells us, when she finally turns up, how she enjoyed the theatre of watching along with the rest of us who had won!

If that's not Stockholm syndrome I don't know what is.

Then the Greens had to actually sign the thing off. It looked a mess: no policy, no portfolios, no detail.

So from what we know, who wins? Well at four Cabinet posts and an under secretary, depending on what the portfolios are, that's a good result for NZ First.

Having to give that up is something Labour is going to need to explain, a party of nine with five spots in the executive is not proportional.

The Greens are the big losers. Yes they're in government, but only just.

Cabinet spots that aren't in Cabinet and a confidence deal. It's better than opposition, but they too have a lot of explaining to do to their supporters. Mind you given the Metiria Turei debacle, they might not have even been here at all, far less in government.

Labour, well government is government. So it's a win, but at what price?

On policy you can see why Peters picked them, from the economy, the Reserve Bank Act, immigration, housing, there is a lot in common there.

But three very different parties, with a lack of experience in a lot of areas, Jacinda Ardern takes a very big risk if she wants to forge a career as one of this country's more successful leaders.

Many would argue three years in opposition might have served her better than the three years of what a lot of good money would suggest is going to be a tumultuous ride.

And in that vein, you could well argue the Nats aren't really losers.

I hope Bill English doesn't quit. Mainly because he didn't lose, he just didn't get picked.

And that's the madness of MMP. A good strong opposition with the experience they've got, not to mention the numbers, has to be full of enough vim and vigor and hope to think this new Government is ropey, vulnerable and from an opposition's view: ripe for the picking.

Ultimately though, I think we all want the best for this country because we deserve it, and we have had a great run. Let's hope what happened last night doesn't derail it.

Spark can't afford to muck up their new sports app

So Spark, the future in some respects of how we view sport, or an increasing amount of it, isn't ready this weekend for Formula One. They bought the rights, but can't deliver it the way they want.

It is the worst possible start to a change in culture - for that is what is needed - given the Rugby World Cup later this year.

This might well be a classic example of theory over reality, technical concepts versus real world experience. They promised last week it was all good, it isn't.

Now I don't wish them ill will, I hope they're spectacularly successful. I hope they are the people who manage to take a nation that's besotted with rugby in particular, and in the sport's most important of years, and transition us from what we know (the telly) to the future, which is basically streaming.

But you would have thought that in this year of vital importance they might have got off the line cleanly, instead of not quite being ready. Because the simple truth of it is, what they're looking to do looks gargantuan, not just technically but psychologically.

Everyone says what they're trying to do is hard. Streaming is full of faults and problems, and this is not a country with cutting edge streaming services. Not a single one of us, whether we know a lot or next to nothing about streaming and tech, says this is simple stuff.

It has a mixture of the unknown of pushing boundaries, and basically pushing our own technical capabilities, and desires. Many rightly or wrongly don't want to know about it, can't get our head around it, or don't see the need to.

The whole experiment starts off with the hard yards of dragging a rugby-mad nation across the technological line, and into a world we didn't necessarily ask to be in.

So we have a room full of doubters. And on day one this Sunday, Formula One's opening race in Melbourne, Spark aren't ready. And let's be honest, the crowd for Formula One is a fraction of what will be lined up in September for Japan.

This weekend they offload the race to TVNZ, their free-to-air partner, and they will be rubbing their hands with glee. The old world free-to-air terrestrial dinosaur able to deliver what the cutting edge trendies down the road can't. How ironic.

Now this is technically a trial for Spark. It's a free "give it a go, see what you think" practice lap. So in that sense, no need to panic. But if you ever want an example of what energises and unites a nation, nothing beats rugby in World Cup year.

And to play with that history, emotion, and cultural connection by offering up something new and edgy, by way of a fan experience, is to take on as big a hurdle as any corporate could ever possibly imagine.

They simply have to have it spot on. The clock is ticking, and week one when the light went green, they stalled the engine.

Christchurch mosque shootings: Don't be an egg, keep the debate sensible

Fraser Anning is the accidental senator - and most likely Australia's least popular politician. He got egged, has a million-plus signatures looking to oust him, and faces a censure vote in the Parliament.

He is an idiot, but as weird as the Australian electoral system is, a duly elected one. Given the accused mosque gunman is Australian, this debate is playing out in part across the Tasman as well.

Accusations are flying, there is finger pointing. Peter Dutton, the Home Affairs Minister, is accusing the Greens of being as bad as Anning, after the Greens accused Dutton of stoking the flames of hatred.

Penny Wong, these days Leader of the Opposition in the Senate and formally Minister of Finance in the Rudd and Gillard governments, says Dutton normalises hate speech. So in a way we can be grateful that we haven't sunk to that level yet.

But the fascinating thing is, this debate stems from democracy. These are all duly elected officials, and they're elected by support of the wider populace, and that's before you get to Pauline Hanson and One Nation, who will abstain from the aforementioned censure vote.

Now, just to be clear, so no one misconstrues any of this, there is a massive gap between this sort of rhetoric or policy, and mad men with guns.

And the concern is that legitimate debate gets closed down now for fear of, well take your pick, being accused of being a terror supporter, an anti-Semite, anti-Islamist, pro-Islamist, or a white supremacist.

We are in danger of looking to join so many dots, just to somehow satisfy ourselves over why this stuff happens.

My basic premise is people are bad, they're born bad, and get turned bad. Social media plays a role, as does the internet, as does certain political policy, as does extreme groups preaching hate, as does lots of things.

In America we have seen mass shootings based on anger as a result of societal rejection. The loner, the outcast, some family dysfunction, abuse, or poverty. There is always an excuse or rationale.

But in looking to understand the extremes, we don't want to risk bringing the debate back so close to the middle, or norm, or mainstream, so as to stifle genuine views, ideas, ideals and politics.

Has Dutton normalised hate speech? Or has he been part of a boat people policy that has been demanded by Australians? A policy over immigration that is widely popular and successful?

UKIP in Britain basically was born out of protecting borders. Is that legitimate political debate? Or hate speech? Dare we even start on the wall and Donald Trump?

Now you don't have to agree with the policies, which is where the Australian Greens come in with Dutton. But they are policies, in some cases they are popular, and that is what the political and democratic process is about. And that is serving the peoples' desires and expectations.

The guardian and measure being elections every three, four, or five years.

In a time of heightened sensitivity and sadness, certain boundaries are drawn.

But we must be wary, always wary of the agenda of those looking to close down views under the auspices of them being a little radical or extreme - when in reality if held by large swathes of the community, are not.

Shane Jones saga isn't sackable - but it's shonky, shady, loose and arrogant

I don't really think Shane Jones and his presence in that meeting while being in charge of the Provincial Growth Fund, and while having connections to people getting money from that fund, is the scandal of the century.

But it is without question against parts of the Cabinet Manual. And it is without question not ordinary practice, but that's if you are interested in adhering to ordinary practice.

No, it's not sackable. But it is shabby, it is arrogant, it is yet again a display of haphazard government from a group of people that look increasingly like they're out of their depth. And that the norms of decent leadership and governance don't really apply because they're either inept, in terms of procedure and discipline, or literally making it up as they go along.

Many of them look like they won government in a chook raffle, $10 a ticket, winner gets to run the country for a day. At this level the aim is to be squeaky clean, to look like you care about the way you conduct yourself - and to actively show that you are seasoned professionals endeavouring on all occasions to produce policy, law, ideas and governance of the highest level.

This lot are falling well short. If the Cabinet Manual is to be dismissed when it suits, don't have a manual. If indiscretions are to be explained away, don't then say you're wanting to be the most open, honest, and transparent government this country has ever seen. Because you can't be both.

What they increasingly are being is fraudulent - either wilfully or through the increasing series of bumbling, stumbling, amateurish, and hamstrung cock ups. They look out of their depth. They look like they're being expected to perform above their talent pool.

Not all of them, of course. But an image is built up over time, and the more they touch, the more they mess it up.

In this case the PGF is what you'd describe as their second biggest policy plank.

KiwiBuild was their first, and that's in tatters: 74 houses built, 39 not sold, and not a future target anywhere to be seen.

The PGF had promise - $1 billion a year, $3b over the life of the Government. That is huge money with huge potential, but increasingly it looks like a slush fund.

And a company (no matter how worthy) that once claimed the minister in charge of the fund as chairman, with the minister having called a conflict of interest, in the same room where the decision on the money was being made, and answering the critical question from the Finance Minister as to whether they were competent, breaches all rules of good governance and common honesty.

It's shonky, it's shady, it's loose, it's arrogant.

And where in this is our leader? Jacinda Ardern, once again, clings to her skills as a likeable, personable politician who, sadly, when it comes to hard decisions in the real world is hopelessly out of her depth. From Iain Lees-Galloway, to Clare Curran, to Phil Twyford, and now Shane Jones, there seems no indiscretion she would find remotely troubling.

Under Ardern you can do what you like, because she's not into discipline.

It will bite her eventually, you can't run this fast and loose with the rules and precedent, without the image forming that you're really not up to much, and certainly not taking it seriously.

You either want to aspire to good governance or you don't. And the evidence is there now, and sadly too much of it, that they don't.

Government's economic sabotage with oil, gas exploration ban

Can we mount a case of economic sabotage against the Government, now we know the cost of wrecking the offshore oil industry here could be $28 billion over 30 years?

That's what the report into one of their more catastrophic, if not the most catastrophic, decisions tells us - $28 billion gone. The hundreds of millions in licence fees and exploration rights each and every year, and the feed through to the local economies, like Taranaki.

And if you remember, it was an early call from a new government. No consultation, no input, none of the open, honest transparency that they made such as big deal of defining themselves with.

And what did we say at the time? We said companies would pack up and leave.

'No they won't,' said the Government. The claim was the licences don't end for years. They said that, of course, not understanding how business works. Business want support and certainty, they want to know whether to renew deals, they want to know whether to, as the industry calls it, drop or drill.

They dropped. They're leaving, and the report tells us now the impact of that is nearly $30 billion. The Government's only defence is the usual, blind virtue-signally bollocks about working with the region on new ideas, on job opportunities, and renewable options.

Well, what are they? Where are they? How many do they employ? How much are they worth? You will note there is no detail. Do you know why? Because there are no jobs, no business, and no ideas.

They're full of it. Like it or not, the world runs on fossil fuels. Maybe it won't one day, but right now it does. But the Government doesn't like it, hence they acted the way they did.

Australia knows it, their biggest receipts last year came from stuff in the ground. That's why they rolled Malcolm Turnbull, he kept banging on about Paris and climate. And all they want is a surplus, work, and money in the bank. Dare I suggest Taranaki, and every other region affected by this, does to?

And this is where the credibility of this Government is being so badly undermined in the facts.

Once they spout the theory, utter the grandiose promises, and headlines, reality hits. If they had an idea around renewables to cover a $30b gap do you think we might have heard about it now?

Decimating a region for ideological reasons - while spouting hot air about the solutions to the hole you've just dug - is dishonest, deceptive, and economically ruinous.

Employment Relations Authority awarding $9000 to cafe worker on trial is ridiculous

Is the Employment Relations Authority out of touch - and more dangerously - out of control?

A woman goes to a cafe for a job. They like her, she likes them. She works for a day, the day is unpaid, it's an unpaid trial.

The matter ends up in front of the authority, which decides the penalty is $9000 - plus bits and pieces to make up for what they have clearly decided is a day in the woman's life that has been irreparably shattered. The cafe has now gone to the social media pages to raise money.

Now we must accept that there will be subtlety and nuance, as there is in any case like this, a bit of he said, she said.

But upon reading as much detail as I can, it strikes me that we have a pretty basic case of misunderstanding. Clearly the woman didn't know she was working unpaid, given her upset, and when she found out she was angry. Clearly she didn't ask, which I would have thought was her fault.

"As I undertake this trial, what rate am I being paid?" - surely that's a question you would expect to be asked. Can you lay blame at the cafe's door? Sure. Could they, should they, have said "by the way, you realise this is unpaid?"

So with both parties potentially at fault, we have misunderstanding, a miscommunication. How that gets to be a $9000 fine is the real crime.

Further complicating this, is this is not your classic dismissal case. It's not like the worker was useless and they were looking to shift her. She, according to reports, was good, and the employers liked her.

So once again, surely on the surface, this is an example of a conflict that wasn't particularly egregious, outlandish, or not entirely repairable.

Now, when it landed in front of the ERA, did they ask the questions I am? Did they not see this wasn't the crime of the century? Did they not see that all that had really happened was, through a lack of communication, the woman had done a small number of hours free of charge?

She had not been abused or been treated as a slave, she hadn't been treated this way over and over again. This wasn't an underground visa, or family rort, scenario where rip offs had been regular, overt and ongoing.

This was a one-day trial, that hadn't worked out. How does that lead to a $9000 fine? Should the woman have been paid? Yes. Was there perhaps an apology owed? Maybe.

But at $9000 you can't help but conclude the authority is heavily stacked in the worker's favour, and balance is clearly out the window. And I am assuming they also fail to take into account many a small business, despite being seen as the ogre, are not weighed down in riches

$9000 is a heap of dough, and a hammer to deal with a nut.

And the precedent is dangerous. It opens the door, or the perception of the door being opened, to every try-hard and opportunist who might think if they squeal loud enough there is an awfully soft touch at the ERA that doesn't like employers - or have any understanding of how tough it is to run a business, and made a quid.

Three threats to the economy may come crashing together

I have been trying to work out which one of three serious threats to our economy is going to hurt the government most.

Two of them are of their specific doing, so perhaps they're slightly blinded to the pending trouble.

One is a direct result of their actions although at least in part affected by matters beyond their control.

One is the Fair Pay reforms to our workplaces. Two, the capital gains tax. And three, our economic growth.

Now one and two are policies they deliberately and presumably enthusiastically promoted.

The Fair Pay recommendations are just that, it's possible the madness drummed up by the committee led inexplicably by Jim Bolger, could in part be rejected or watered down, you would hope so, but don't hold your breath.

But if this government thinks New Zealanders want a return to the 70's and 80's in terms of sector wide agreements, and a banning of individual contracts, then they need their heads read.

When given the choice in 1990 by the Bolger government, we embraced choice, we opted for individuality, we backed our own talents over the Victorian shackled views of the unions who'd held this country to ransom for decades.

The professions that remain heavily unionised are there in 2019 for all to see.

All troubled, all aggrieved, all involved in ongoing industrial action ... 2018 was full of their plight.

The capital gains tax though, might be counteracted to a degree with the promise that overall, the tax system and its changes would remain fiscally neutral.

If labour go into election year offering most workers a personal tax cut to offset the CGT imposed on comparatively a few, they may get away with it.

But the bit to watch, that few if any seem to have picked up on, is at what rate are they pinging you on CGT. The suggestion seems to be the marginal rate which means 28 or 33 per cent. That is a spectacularly high rate, Labour before they dumped it in campaigning on it last time, had it at 15 per cent ... good luck selling it at more than double that rate.

But it does play to Labour's base, how many traditional Labour supporters have shares and investment homes, the sort of thing a CGT will capture.

If the Labour voters see the "rich pricks" (Michael Cullen head of the committee making the recommendations) getting taxed and they get money in their pocket then the wider fall out may be able to be managed.

And then three, growth.

Most people have missed this, given the number came out just before Christmas.

Our Q3 GDP was 0.3 per cent, which is abysmal.

Add that to Q1 at 0.5 and Q2 at 1 per cent and you have the calendar year ending September at 1.8 per cent growth.

You would need Q4's number to be 1.7 per cent to get us to the international average, to even get us within range of our major trading partners.

Will we get 1.7 per cent in Q4 ? No we will not, nor indeed anywhere close to it.

Which means we will in all probability be growing annually at little more than 2 % per cent which is an indictment on this government's performance.

They have taken a rock star economy and strangled it.

They will look to blame international uncertainty, don't believe them.

The IMF forecast for global growth is an average of 3.5 per cent. We should be doing that or close, we are not.

And having ended the calendar year with anaemic growth, chuck in a capital gains tax and see what that does to investment intention. And lock our workplaces back up in a way Jim Knox and Ken Douglas would have been proud of.

And the three issues calamitously and spectacularly come crashing into each other.

On the upside, that may make Kiwibuild look like a clever idea that's a raging success.

KiwiBuild scheme is a house of cards

KiwiBuild has not had the best of weeks.

In fact, it didn't have that great a week last week. Last week we got the news that you can flip your property and keep most of the profits - that was despite the Government originally saying you couldn't.

We also got the news that KiwiBuild ballots have been extended due to lack of demand in some places. That, of course, was based on the fact that KiwiBuild isn't a home programme for those locked out of the market as the Government told us it was: it's for six-figure executives who actually have a lot of choice in the market anyway.

Then we find out this week that the $2 billion set aside to build the 100,000 homes isn't within a mile of being enough. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment says it's out by about $18b.

The money set aside might build 1000 homes, not 100,000. So far you've got limited demand, prices too high and not enough start-up capital, which is why it's become a buy off the plan scheme from developers - the Government doesn't have the dough.

And that's before you get to New Plymouth, where the Minister of this increasing calamity announced his programme for Marfell.

Marfell has fallen by the wayside Phil Twyford suggested, and KiwiBuild would be part of its regeneration.

Brilliant. The price limit for Marfell would be $450,000, certainly a lot better than places like Queenstown and Auckland. But unfortunately not that attractive as it turns out given the median price for Marfell is $326,000 - so it's over $100,000 cheaper on the open market.

Well it's $326,000 if you take CoreLogic numbers. If you take council numbers it's actually $271,000 - a full $179,000 cheaper.

So not only aren't KiwiBuild homes for those locked out, they're not even competitive on the open market.

In fact, having checked as of yesterday on Trade Me, for $450k or under there are 27 listings all over New Plymouth currently for sale. Most of them very nice, all sorts of areas, houses, apartments and units.

So what is Phil actually selling? It appears nothing more than a new home. Which is not to be dismissed, as we have said before, we seem to be short of houses. Adding to the supply can't hurt.

But that's not what KiwiBuild was supposed to be about. Is the Government entering the home building market to build some houses that would have already been built really doing anything at all?

And is continuing to insist that this is some level of social assistance when it blatantly isn't, politically wise? When not a week goes by now, where facts defy the spin.

So demand is limited, money is short, the prices are too high, you keep the profits so they'll be flipped, two-thirds of potential customers are locked out, and that's before we get to original porky of promising 100,000 houses in 10 years (which is never going to happen).

The only real house here, is the house of cards called KiwiBuild.

Government's clueless about the danger Kiwi Jihadist Mark Taylor poses

I can't quite work out the Winston Peters approach to Kiwi Jihadist Mark Taylor. He couldn't give a rats about him and neither, says Peters, could 99.999 per cent of Kiwis.

The media might be interested, but he isn't, he says. On face value he is, of course, wrong. We are worried about Taylor, he is a recognised and documented danger to this country and its safety. Even more so, if and when he lands back here.

Does Peters mean as he sits in Syria in a jail we don't care, and he can rot? If that's it, then yes, Peters is onto it.

But is the Peters line more Machiavellian? Is Peters running the bad cop, to Ardern's good cop? Ardern, beholden and mesmerised by the power of the United Nations, would never in a million years consider putting on some big people pants and taking a fairly staunch stand again this bloke.

Her approach appears to be to sound tough by saying he's on his own, and hoping he's not bright enough to get to help, grab some paperwork and make his way back here. Meantime, she's sent Peters out to pretend this is a non-story and we have bigger fish to fry.

The problem with the Taylors of this world is two-fold: one, he's nuts and two, he's not alone. This is a real and present danger to this country and indeed all countries who find themselves in similar circumstances. And in this country in particular whose justice system seems ill-equipped to deal with some operators.

Most will already have concluded that the number of people who get let out prematurely is too high. The recidivism rate is too high, the system, as it stands, around bracelets and monitoring doesn't work well enough.

And that's before you get to the simple reality that this is a Government that is keen to have more people out of jail, as opposed to in it. Justice Minister Andrew Little is on record saying jail doesn't work, his specific policy is to kill three strikes, he's not hardline, and he's backed up in that by his leader.

So, armed with all of that fact-based information, does it fill us with confidence that the world's jihadists, a few of which have come from New Zealand, are now on the move back to their homelands having been vanquished in their efforts to destroy the West?

If you are not worried you should be. And having Peters pretend this isn't interesting, or doesn't matter doesn't help.

We owe this guy Taylor nothing, and yet we have a Prime Minister dancing on the head of a pin, playing secret squirrel on any plans they may or may not have on how to protect us, and deal with what is going to be an ongoing issue all over the world.

Government stance and approach is everything. Look at America, look at Britain, intent counts. This Government's intent so far is a mix of non-plussed naivety and smokescreen-based verbiage.

All of which leaves us wondering if they have a clue.

Game over - don't waste any more money on fixing up Eden Park

Surely it can't just be me that sees the absolute absurdity of Eden Park and its financial woes.

For those in Auckland it's a city-wide disgrace that we should all be embarrassed about. For those outside of Auckland we can laugh because it's just another example of dysfunction that sits along side things like traffic congestion and house prices.

Eden Park needs $100 million, some for loans, some for maintenance. Eden Park is in a world of fiscal trouble because you've never seen such a major facility so hamstrung and hobbled from actually doing what it was supposed to do.

Just a week ago Forsyth Barr Stadium in Dunedin announced it had its best year ever - more than twice the population of Dunedin had gone to it. The venue has racked up millions in revenue - and the forecast is nothing but upbeat.

Wellington's downtown facility is widely praised, used and supported. On a side note, if I was Westpac I wouldn't have walked away from the sponsorship last week. Loyalty and longevity are valuable assets, and being there from the start is worth its weight in gold, I would have thought. But it's their money I guess.

Anyway, stadiums can, and are, done well - unless you're Auckland.

Too many people hate Eden Park, and too many other people want to whine about Eden Park. Michael Chugg, who's Elton John's promoter and a legend in the game, pretty much called it as it is last week. He thinks the place is a joke, you can't get access, the rules are ridiculous, the costs even more so.

India didn't play cricket there because the lights would be on too late, under normal circumstances you couldn't make this stuff up. The biggest side in the world in a city with a large Indian population - why wouldn't you want to take advantage of that?

One of the biggest acts in the world on a farewell tour is made for Eden Park, but no, let's send it elsewhere.

Sir Ray Avery wants a charity event there, but has a $700,000 bill simply for the paperwork, once the wowsers wound up the letter-writing campaign.

So the upside of all this is it's not like it's tricky to work out why it's in the mess it's in. A stadium actually needs to pay its way. So either one of a couple of things happen, you either start using it properly, or you don't.

And it seems patently obvious that if you're not going to, if you insist on continuing with all the wacky rules, then it will simply go bust.

You either increase revenue or you don't, upside is they can. Do they want to? I don't think so. So close it down, bowl it, and get Phil Twyford and his hammer in.

Now I know all the purists will be outraged. The history, the memories, the investment already made, yes, yes, yes, I agree. But the place is hobbled, deliberately hobbled, by the haters. And unless that stops, the game is over.

Is it going to stop? I can't see it.

This is called facing reality, either stare down the enemy and get on with it, or don't.

But $100 million is way too much for a place that shouldn't be in the hole in the first place.

Finance Minister Grant Robertson's numbers spare the Government's blushes

If it wasn't for Grant Robertson this Government would look like more of a mess than it already does.

The Finance Minister's fiscal update yesterday reminds us that overall this economy of ours (and let's be frank, the economy is just about everything) is still looking pretty good and the books look to be in pretty good shape.

The key points are the surplus is rising, it'll be over $8 billion by the early 2020s. Our debt, and that's the most important figure of all, will be down to 17 per cent of GDP - which in any one's language is an outstanding number and can, and probably will, provide resilience through tough times.

Our growth rate is expected to bump along at 3 per cent, once again a pretty solid, if not spectacular, figure.

And it is Robertson, not unlike Bill English did, who has quietly got along with the business of keeping things running while too much around him is a mess. Between the Karel Sroubek residency saga, KiwiBuild, dumped ministers Clare Curran and Meka Whaitiri, the free fees revelation this week, not to mention the tsunami of working groups, too much of this Government is a mess.

To be fair, the Greens have kept their powder dry, New Zealand First has been pretty solid and in some cases the mature one in the gang. But given it's a co-lab, what the biggest party does, and how it behaves, reflects indirectly on them all.

The fact that Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern is still explaining Sroubek, in a story that's now into at least its eighth week, is a classic example of what a shambles they are. Even if they'd never promised to be the most open and honest and transparent government we had ever seen, even if they had not promised any of that, they'd still look dodgy.

But the fact they did make the promise makes them look shifty as hell. The opportunity to front-foot stuff, that may in fact mean little, if anything, has been consistently waved in favour or having it dragged out weeks later with the ensuing carnage that goes with it.

KiwiBuild is a mess with more bad headlines than good. It's a massive project with a massive reputational question mark over it.

And the free fees designed to boost student numbers - it didn't. No one turned up and all that has happened is those who bail early stick us with the bill, thus missing the classic life lesson of the harder you work for something, the more it means.

I said earlier this year I couldn't work out whether this lot are naive or Machiavellian, I still can't. I suspect it's a bit of both.

But as I also said at this stage of the political cycle, one, not many are gripped about who they're voting for and two, economies and their performance are the vote shifters, not a bunch of small rats and mice, like scandals that more often than not fascinate the press gallery and few others.

So here's to Grant Robertson who, although to be honest he's in charge of an inherited success, at least to this point despite all the clowns around him, has still managed to hold the greatest political jewel intact.

The numbers, they're good, and numbers don't lie.

Seize the day Simon Bridges, get rid of your enemies

I am not the first person to have observed the political year has gotten off to a splendid start for the leader of the Opposition, notwithstanding the MediaWorks poll which (if it proves more than a rogue result) might dent proceedings slightly.

Simon Bridges will be and should be feeling a bit better in 2019 than he did in 2018.
His prosperous start came from his state of the nation speech and the tax bracket changes he announced - people love money in their pockets.

But it's also been partly funded by the Government, who had to confirm to the world what most of us had all ready worked out, namely KiwiBuild was a house of cards collapsing in on itself.

He's probably further enhanced his credentials as a potential prime minister now that the Provincial Growth Fund looks like it might be falling into a KiwiBuild-style hole as well.

There is a theme developing. Lots of noise, announcements and committees, but when the questions are asked, not a lot of actual production in terms of jobs or houses or outcomes.

That's made even worse of course given one of the announcements was that this was to be the "year of delivery".

Now the reason this is all good for Bridges is the truism, in the political game, that often your best days come from the other blokes' worst days.

Governments lose elections, oppositions rarely win them.

When a government fails to deliver, looks out of touch or incompetent or tired, an opposition automatically gains.

You'll be amazed to reminisce by December this year, if this current government keeps going the way it is, just how polished and professional and ready for office Bridges looks.

Now, in the spirit of being helpful, I have advice for Simon on how he can own a bit of this himself and propel his chances ever higher - or if you subscribe to the poll results then to dig himself out of a hole.

One, get rid of Jami-Lee Ross. And two, rule out doing a deal with Winston Peters.

Ross is your worst sort of MP, a self-serving grandstander. He is not as dangerous as he appeared at first blush, given he promised at that jaw-dropping press conference last year to bring the house down before realising he hadn't brought the matches.

But he is the sort of person who the media sadly can't ignore and the Sarah Dowie debacle is all the proof you need.

Bridges has the answer but seems reluctant to use it — the waka law of Winston.

Why National don't like it, I have no idea. From Alamein Kopu to Brendan Horan to Jami-Lee Ross, they are the outliers who are or were in work because of their party and yet choose to destroy it all and still expect the baubles of office.

It's a dishonest practice that this law addresses. In fact this law was written in many respects for Jami-Lee Ross-type situations.

Bridges going round with his fingers in his ears saying 'I'm ignoring him, I'm ignoring him', will not solve his problem.

Yes, they hated the law. Swallow your pride, use it, and you'll be amazed how (a) the problem vanishes and (b) you look like a better more decisive leader.

Which brings us to Winston Peters.

By not ruling him out, Bridges looks weak, he looks desperate, he looks like a bloke uncertain of victory and holding out hope they can repair all the damage and patch together a haphazard sort of love affair post 2020 if the numbers fall their way.

Simon - let me tell you straight. Peters shafted you, and he will shaft you again if he gets the chance. By not ruling him out you give him oxygen and life.

It is little short of a political miracle Peters has been able to conduct himself the way he has all these years, surviving in part because the players who could've ended it were too weak to do so.

By the end of this term Jacinda might well regret she ever got picked (read Mathew Hooton's column last Friday, he's onto it).

Which is not to say New Zealand First won't be back, they're always close to 5 per cent.
And Northland now given the PGF money surely has enhanced their chances of a seat.

But National needs to look and be bold, confident, and that comes from the top down.
There is everything to play for, a government in real trouble, a leader with a good start to the year and the chance to act decisively and cement his place.

My advice is simple: seize the day Simon - pull the trigger on both of them.

Greenwashing cycle lanes doesn't make them any busier

We have a name now apparently for the way people like me feel about cycle lanes.

It's called "bikelash".

It's being studied - isn't everything being studied? But it would appear to me it's being studied in a highly dubious way, which isn't a surprise given most of the crap that's peddled about bike lanes is dubious.

Last time I wrote about this questions had been raised about estimates for some Auckland cycleways and the reality when it was actually measured seemed to bear little resemblance to what they'd forecast by way of usage.

To bring yourself up to speed look up the Herald article entitled 'Bikelash: Researchers examine what drives opposition to cycle lanes'.

Now a Dr Adrian Field seems to be leading this research, but listen to some of the quotes and ask yourself whether you think he's got an agenda.

The study looked at three cycleways around the country that had major amounts of push back against them, and looked to see why.

I can tell you why, he could have saved the time and money.

Cycleways don't get used much, they take away valuable bitumen for cars, they take car parks, they prevent access to retail, which as a result harms business.
And to achieve all of this, it costs a fortune to make them.

There is not a lot to understand when it comes to the cycleway, it's peddled (no pun intended) by zealots who are driven by ideology.

They operate on the "build it and they will come" scenario, except they have built it, and we didn't come. When it all becomes obvious it doesn't work it leads to anger frustration and upset for the rest of us who feel duped — hence the bikelash.

Now to Dr Field.

In the Herald story, he says the obvious problems he found towards cycle lanes are the aforementioned lost parks, narrowed roads and motorists having to drive slower . . . and he says . . . you ready? . . .

"There is nothing wrong with any of these." Sorry Dr YES THERE IS, if you don't get that, you are missing the entire bikelash rationale, it's exactly what's wrong.
It's not the change, it's the futility of the change. It's the inconvenience and the inefficiency of being forced into a pattern of movement that simply isn't necessary.

There is more. After all, he said "bike lanes were good for society they offered a boost to public health"

Really? Even when they're not used?

He's got the cart before the horse, if we were all on bikes yes, the public health might improve, do we know by how much? No, but given we are not all on bikes do we know if public health has been altered one jot? And if we don't . . . why is he suggesting it has? Once again, theory not reality.

And that's before we get to Lime scooters who have taken lord knows how many people off bikes.

And then the good doctor tries this out: "If we've only got 12 years to limit climate change catastrophe, the bike is part of the change." What? 12 years? Where does that number come from? And what happened to the 12 years when in 2000 they said the same thing and 19 years later we're still having the same stale argument.

And the term climate change "catastrophe" gives Field away on his views of the environment.

All of which he is of course entitled to, but is this research a balanced piece of work designed to find answers?

"After initial resistance most people appreciate bike lanes.."

Really? How many out of how many asked? What percentage? Is there any proof of any of this? And if we all love them so much why is he studying bikelash? Why, if we've all got used to them does bikelash even exist?

Does anyone ask any questions any more? Or are we happy to just all roll over and accept research as fact?

You heard of greenwashing? This sounds like cyclewashing.

To the entitled little snots who walked out of Fraser High School

"F*** you Mrs Crawford". Mrs Crawford's speech on truancy, and what sort of person you become, appears to have been a little late if the graffiti around Fraser High in Hamilton is a good indication of the quality of the attendees.

F*** up Mrs Crawford is sadly what Mrs Crawford was worried about. A group of young punks who have no respect for establishment, for elders, for adults, for themselves, for advice.

It's always a little hard to judge the fine detail of these things when you're not there. But my assumption was she wasn't being literal.

If you bunk off, you're not literally going to end up in the various predicaments she suggested you might. And even if you did end up in some of those predicaments, truancy alone would not have been the sole reason for it.

The point I am assuming Mrs Crawford was making was that truancy is connected to a certain type of thinking and behaviour. It's connected to an outlook and attitude.

It's representative of nothing particularly productive. And if that attitude and outlook pervades your general thinking, it becomes habit.

And when it becomes habit, other aspects of your life and outlook slip as well. And cumulatively things don't tend to go well from there.

It's the same speech we've all received at one point or another from our teachers, our principals, our career guidance adviser, our parents. Work hard, do good, try your best, respect your elders.

Be basically a decent, go-ahead sort of person. Except in this day and age it's recorded, it's put on the net. Cue a bit of outrage, cue a bit of self-entitlement, cue a bit of literal misunderstanding, cue a bit of poorly placed self-importance - and you're off and running with reaction 2018 styles.

No wonder teachers find life so tough. It's not the money or the hours or the paperwork, it's the little snots in the classroom.

Somewhere along the way, and you will find a lot of the answers at their homes, kids have decided they're important. You might even find some of the answers in the classroom - we live in an age where everyone needs to be heard.

We all have a voice and a point and a plight and rights. So that leads to placards and marches and protests, and in this case walkouts.

And sadly, instead of all being lined up and sent to detention and threatened with suspension, they will be seen by some (sadly the wrong sort of people) as some sort of modern day heroes.

I assume what keeps Mrs Crawford coming back is the hope that although 100 students didn't hear her, many more did. And that the majority are decent, the majority want to do the right thing, the majority don't bunk - and Mrs Crawford's voice isn't wasted.

Labour law reforms making business jittery

As we head towards the end of the year, we can start to join a few dots as to why things are politically the way they are.

Why despite the economy, business confidence has remained so abysmally low.

How do you explain 3.9 per cent unemployment against the backdrop that business thinks the world is going to end?

What is it they are seeing the rest of us aren't?

Labour law reform is the answer: most of what they feared is about to come true.
Yes it is watered down, but not a lot.

New Zealand First can be thanked for providing some common sense, but you have to wonder if they shouldn't have, couldn't have, gone a bit further.

There is no hiding the simple truth this Government is pro-union, Labour especially, and there is no hiding that the labour law reforms boost the power and presence in the workplace of the union movement.

Most of us see unions for what they are, opportunists with a tired old act.

In Victorian England when the 9-year-olds were up the chimneys or down the mines they needed collective protection.

Fast forward 150 years and some of those at the low-wage end of the bargain - the cleaners, the aged-care workers, those who do the thankless tasks in the wee small hours - still need help from a voice greater than their own.

But the bulk of the union business these days has evolved into an industry where agitation and a constant peddling of the belief that life is miserable and the wages are even worse, is needed to keep the subs coming in.

This is why we have seen so much industrial action this year; the Labour party is their ticket to a re-emergence.

The worst of the changes are the pan-industry agreements, the ability of a union to cut a deal across an entire industry and in doing so remove the individual employer's ability to fund, run and decide the direction of their own business.

This was quite rightly the business community's greatest fear.

If you're a forestry worker, the unions decide your pay, not your employer.

And if you're an employer, what you can afford becomes irrelevant, as the decision is taken out of your hands.

If there are too many of these agreements, and they affect too many industries, and the industrial action becomes too common, too aggressive, too disruptive, then it's at this point the Government might start to wish they'd never gone down this track. Because that's the great sadness of all of this - we have been down this track before, and we didn't like it.

We got rid of it because it became farcical, we thought this particular approach to industrial relations went out with the likes of Jim Knox, Ken Douglas and Pat Kelly.

But back to the dots. Labour might like to ask itself why National, despite Simon, is on 46 per cent.

Then Labour might like to look at its agenda, Michael Cullen about to deliver the details of a new capital gains tax. A KiwiBuild programme that is suffering severe reputational and fiscal issues. A budget that just last week it was revealed was badly overspent.

An ongoing series of strikes and stop works driven by demands for increases so large many are laughable. A sense that ineptness, bad decision-making and poor governance isn't dealt to (Iain Lees-Galloway I am looking at you).

And now an industrial upheaval from a failed bygone era.

That is an anathema to most ordinary new Zealanders who've relished a decade of economic prosperity built on hard work, return on hard work, and an industrial freedom to be judged on your abilities, not a collective sop to cover the backsides of the weakest link.

A solid inherited economy is really all that's saved the Government this year.

But if they care to join the dots they will see increasingly clearly, that the polls are softening, the storm clouds are looming and the industrial reforms feared by so many might just turn out to be their biggest mistake.

Globetrotting Greens co-leader James Shaw is full of hot air

I read with interest over the weekend that the latest venture into virtue signalling is to stop flying in 2019. No more planes, no more trips, no more destinations.

It's one thing to give up a plastic bag, does it change the world? No, but it might make you feel a bit better about yourself. Maybe you want to not drink in January, or July, or whatever month it is that the earnest gather in.

But not to fly? For as long as the human race has existed we have wanted to explore, to discover, and nothing has enabled us to do that more with speed and comparative cheapness than the plane. The plane has revolutionised travel, it has shrunk the world, and made the planet more accessible than we ever might have imagined just a few short decades ago.

And the next step is one stop destinations, anywhere to anywhere in one go. And beyond that we have space, commercial flights to the moon, to who knows where.

But let's not bother with any of that, let's just stay here, jump on a bike, go to a freedom camping ground, pitch a tent, and compost our own rubbish. If any reasonable number of us did any of this, we'd cripple the airline industry headed, of course in this country, by our national carrier. And we all have a stake in that.

And the people peddling this nonsense are the climate change brigade, the alarmists who, for at least a couple of decades now, have told us we are on the edge of a precipice, the point of no return,and unless we act now, or as it was 20 years ago, then the Earth as we know is over.

Except, of course, it isn't, hasn't and most likely probably won't be. This is not to deny some sort of climate change is going on, but it is to, at least in some small way, call out the alarmists who as each month, year, and decade go by seem more and more wrong.

And as the message fails to maintain its urgency or presence in our minds, if it ever did, they need to come up with more weird and wonderful ideas to attract our attention, and further enhance and progress their agenda.

Which brings us to James Shaw, the co-leader of the Green Party. Who, more than any other MP, in the past quarter has travelled the world, spent our money doing it, and most importantly laid down a stupendous carbon footprint? That's right it's James. He should have "hypocrisy" stamped on his forehead.

Where did he go and what did he do? I'm sure he'd be full of defences. I'm sure there has been, in these many thousands of miles travelled, some spectacularly important climate change work. I'm sure he has been in room after room, hotel after hotel, lecturing on the dangers we face if we don't do something.

So has Shaw done something? Of course not. And that's the problem, the only thing they're producing is hot air.

No laws, no regulations, no progress, just more warnings, alarms, and talk. Talk, talk, talk and all done with the assistance of modern jet travel, which according to Shaw and his lot, is ruining the planet we are supposedly working so hard to save.

He is the Meghan Markle of New Zealand politics. Tells us how to live our lives, what we are doing wrong, how bad we all are. And then straight to business class for a multi-thousand mile trip to the other side of the planet.

Talking the talk? Yes. Walking the walk? You got to be kidding.

All Blacks deserve better than panicking, fickle fans

I have little doubt that Steve Hansen is leaving.

You don't pre-announce an announcement if you're staying. If you want to stay, you let the record do the talking. You get to the World Cup and win it, and then say I'm ready for the offers.

I hope I am wrong. Hansen, for those who forget (and clearly most people have given the commentary we have had this week over him, Kieran Read, the All Blacks in general) was the great worry when the legend that was Sir Graham Henry moved on.

No-one could replace him. These were dark and worrying days… until they weren't. Then we had the player exit, Richie McCaw and Dan Carter, those were dark and worrying days. Until they weren't.

And now, almost as though we are concussed, we lose a good game to Ireland, Hansen needs to go, and Read is not what he was and needs not to be captain or not be useless or whatever it is the critics bang on about.

It's almost like we are trapped in a cycle of permanent moroseness. We are desperate to worry about how it's all going to go wrong for our national side.

This is the side that has won the last two World Cups, is the number one side in the world and has been for nine years, but now it's all over? Things are hopeless and we need sackings, resignations and retirements.

Get a grip. Our expectations are hopelessly unrealistic. If you also remember, we used to angst about winning the World Cup.

Until 2011, we'd win all our games then bomb out at cup time. And we collectively, if you remember, came to the conclusion that really in the grand scheme of things all that really matters was that cup.

If we won that cup we could lose every game in the ensuing four years. But the cup was what really counted.

So in 2011 we win, then we win again in 2015, and suddenly that original thinking is out the window. We are goldfish. We are fly-by-nighters. We have no faith, we are not consistent.

Having faith in a team is part of the deal. You're not there for the ride, only on the good days.

You don't desert the ideal when you lose, and yet look at this week. We've lost the plot.

These are the best players in the world, with the best coach in the world, that makes up the best team in the world. So we lost, just to Ireland, big deal.

I'm as confident today as I ever was. This is a class operation, that will do what no one has done next year in Japan: three wins in a row.

I will most likely be there, and when we win, will be more than happy to tell all the doubters "I told you so".

Construction industry an embarrassment - good on the Government for stepping in

The Government's move on the construction industry is spot on.

It's a sorry, sad old state of affairs they've had to do what they have, but the market has failed.

Almost 20 per cent of government procurement goes to construction so if you want to bid for work, part of the deal will be you have to train people.

Nowhere near the training needed goes on.

Those who do train, train and then get the talent poached. Companies who haven't trained, pitch for work by under-cutting those with higher costs through things like training.

It's a ropey, unsatisfactory, and amateurish way to operate.

The Government is also looking at cutting deals through programmes to encourage more people to train. Extensions of work for the dole and so on.

We need 30,000 in the industry now. We'll need 50,000 in a couple of years' time. And what's galling is this is all unfolding at a time when there has never been more work. Never has there been more growth, never been more demand.

This should be an industry that is on fire. It should be expanding, employing, training, and paying more. It should be an exemplar of an industry showing the rest of business what's possible when times are good.

Instead it's a mess. From Fletchers, the so-called blue chip operator, to Ebert in liquidation just this week, to the apartment complexes sitting idle while endless problems stall progress and shatter deadlines, to the subbies out of pocket. If you wanted a 101 on how to cock up an industry's reputation, you'd be looking pretty hard to find a better example than what we have in front of us right now.

This is an industry famous for what? Boom and bust. And worse this time, bust in the boom times.

For a person like myself, who in general terms argues the merits of a free market, this is an embarrassment.

Yes, governments sometimes can do things only governments can do.

Incentives on training programmes is a win-win. It gets people into jobs, it fills gaps, it reduces negative social indicators.

But what the Government is up to this week in construction, is more resurrection, it's more life support, it's more rap across the knuckles. It's a broad-based "get your act together" campaign.

And it is such a shame it's needed. Having spent the past couple of years along with so many other industries decrying the gaps and the opportunities, there seemed a real push in schools to turn kids onto the trades.

And once that trigger was pulled, what did they see? Chaos, locked gates, and receivers.

So this week the Government scores well for its approach to business. The R&D move is welcome, and the incentives for construction to wake their ideas up is vital, and not a moment too soon.

So where's all the KiwiBuild buyers then?

The Housing Minister can be grateful that his Immigration counterpart is currently immersed in the Government's biggest shambles.

Because if it wasn't for Iain Lees-Galloway, and his nightmare of the Karel Sroubek decision, then Phil Twyford would be front and centre and getting a great deal more attention than he is over what is increasingly looking like one of this Government's potentially most damaging policies.

Here are some numbers I doubt many of us were aware of: there are only 338 qualified buyers so far. That's it.

You would have heard of the thousands that applied, of course. The Government wanted you to hear that. The thousands that signed up for the updates, the thousands that showed an interest. But an interest isn't a deposit, it isn't a deal, and it certainly isn't a sale.

That number is 338, and ballots have had to be extended because of lack of interest.

And why? Well, because as we have also told you, and these past two weeks have revealed it, KiwiBuild is not the scheme it was portrayed as, it is not for the low waged, the locked out, it is not the social housing programme it was painted.

It's for the middle-class, six-figure salary earners, graduate doctors, the marketing executives - and once Treasury did the numbers the scam was exposed.

Only a third of people could ever possibly afford the $650,000 price tag for a three or four-bedroom home.

Of course lots of people wanted a house, but you need well in excess of $100,000 of income to pay for it, and there are not many of those people out there.

And that's before you get to the bit where, if you do have that sort of money, the market has hundreds of other options for you already. In Auckland alone, a week or so back when I checked, there were over 900 listings. You don't need Twyford's ballot, there are 900-plus other options you already had your name pulled out for. It's called the open market.

So reality has hit, 338 set to go. The upside is only 18 houses have actually been built.

But, when that number hits the thousands, and Twyford doesn't have qualified buyers, then what? Who buys the house? Remembering, of course, that Twyford said the money from the sales would be ploughed back into more homes.

What if there are no sales, because there is no demand? Who buys the houses? Who pays the builders? We do, that's who.

And that is your budget blown. Unless the demand suddenly appears from nowhere , or the Government start creating a new class of customer by way of subsidy or split equity, they are going to end up with hundreds, if not thousands of houses, with no one lined up to buy them.

If this had been a social housing programme it would be different. But it isn't, it's a commercial development that competes with every other house for sale.

If it looked this ugly this early I'd be panicking. The promise: 100,000 homes. The queue so far: 338. You do the math.

Philip Morris' tax break plea to stop selling cigarettes worth considering

Ideology versus practicality. Philip Morris, who most of us would have little time for given they're tobacco peddlers, want a tax break.

They have new sticks that heat and don't burn, and arguably help people quit smoking. If they get a tax break, they'll stop selling cigarettes.

Not a bad idea. The simple truth is we are not going to be smokefree by 2025 (mind you we never were).

Why? Because some people simply don't want to, don't know how to, aren't dedicated to the cause enough. And that includes smokers and the government.

Sadly, the real gains we made were under the watch of Dame Tariana Turia who, when in Parliament with the Māori Party, hit the issue hard with tax. Tax works when it comes to managing behaviour. Price these things out of the market.

Sadly, as the price rose some focused on dairy robberies and connected the two. The moment you make smokes a certain price people want to rob stores. Dairy owners joined a chorus arguing that without smokes they wouldn't make money. I doubt that's true.

But complicating matters was New Zealand First, who have adopted a stance that a tax hits the poorest hardest, and it's the poorest who tend to smoke the most. All of which is true, but it doesn't mean that one, you give up on a mechanism that was working and two, acquiesce to a storyline about dairies and robberies that was highly unlikely to be true in the first place.

And so we are in a sort of limbo-land, a grand plan that will not come to fruition because we have bottled it.

So the Government is left to return to their virtue signalling best by introducing pointless new laws like banning smoking in cars with kids, as though that is going to make one jot of difference.

So back to Philip Morris, is there merit in their offer? Yes. Why? Because it's practical. And as someone, I think quite rightly, said to me the other day Dame Tariana would have jumped at this deal. Ardern, of course, driven by a blind ideology, won't.

And yet, why not?

Fossil fuels get tax breaks. The electric car industry is getting millions and they're not even breaks, they're gifts to build charging stations. If the car industry gets its way you'll be able to get a cheap car, paid for by the rest of us.

Why? Because fossil fuels, like tobacco, are bad for us. Electric? Not so much. Why is it the right answer for one group, and not for another?

In turning down an idea the rejection must come with logic, there is no logic to this rejection. Especially given the precedent has already been set with EVs.

And that's the trouble you strike when you have one rule for one group, and one for everyone else. They might find the same trouble if they exempt Māori land from a capital gains tax.

You either want to address a problem or you don't. And you either want to be practical, or you don't.

In this case, it appears once again the Government can't peddle enough ideology because noise is easy. Practical solutions seem a bit beyond them.

Warehouse Stationery reckless to promote protests and kids wagging school

Has Warehouse Stationery crossed a line? They have launched a campaign to promote the value, or power, of print in an increasingly digital world.

On Sunday you can take your design, dawdle, or picture, and have it printed on high quality paper. And you can do this with their encouragement if you're one of those who are walking out of school to protest lack of action on climate change.

And they say, and I quote, "As the first large company in New Zealand to go carbon neutral, we're inspired by the Schools 4 Climate Action next Friday, and we'd love it if students took advantage of our free printing service."

Now is it the role of business to promote protests? To encourage kids to bunk school when it's a legal requirement to actually not bunk school?

Or is this yet another virtue signalling sop, that allows Warehouse Stationery to position themselves at the forefront of one of our current PC fascinations, namely climate change? Or are they encouraging just general protest?

Will they be supplying free printing to the doctors, nurses, and bus drivers next time they're on strike? And if not, why not? Is their cause not quite as earnest?

Has the company thought through the implications of encouraging kids to a protest, and protest movement, against the will of the parents of those kids who will unquestionably go "what's your problem mum? Even The Warehouse are into it."

And what this all forgets and misses is the simple truth: if we all stopped and checked ourselves for just a minute, given we have all been there as kids, is that this is not about climate change - it's about bunking off and having fun. It's a day out with mates, it's about noise making, attention, and generally just skiving off.

To pretend otherwise is to have acquired a major dose of delusion in our outlook between now, and when we would have done exactly the same thing as students ourselves.

Make the protest on a Saturday, or at 5pm and just see how many turn up then.

And in that reality is the futility of all this, even if there was a teaching moment, which there isn't, the teaching moment would have been about dedication to a cause, about passion, belief, and trying to create change through protest.

All that we get out of this is time off school, and a corporate looking to leverage that to make them look cool with the kids.

And that's before you get to the value of protest itself. Like so much of life, the days of placards, marches, and dumb chants are largely over. And the parts that aren't over aren't effective. It's a digital age, it's clickbait news, and standing in front of something arms linked singing "we shall overcome" belongs to another decade.

We are teaching the kids nothing. What's next? Burn your bra lessons? Are Bendon going to sponsor that?

Let the schools get on with learning - and Warehouse Stationery can stick to the magic markers.

The high cost of being a winner

Mark Hager starts his year on a high, not the way he might have planned... but nevertheless it looks like things have worked out well.

Hager was part of what appeared to be a bad year for all sports who became caught up in the global angst-fest over the way people are treated.

From hockey to football to cycling .. many a claim was made by aggrieved upset and angry players towards management and coaches over the way they were treated.

The complaints ranged from the specific to. in the case of Hager and women's hockey, the particularly vague.

For those of us observing, it seemed there were a bunch of the Black Sticks who simply didn't like the way they were coached.

Hager was a bit hard, a bit expectant, a bit old school.

Cycling, if you followed their saga, had at least specific allegations of rules broken.

Women's football sadly looked more like the cycling, a lot of angst and reaction to approach, as opposed to egregious crimes.

All sports though, partly because of the day and age we live in, and the growing fear that telling it like it is may offend, responded with the obligatory review.

Jobs were lost, shortcomings were highlighted and promises of a better tomorrow were made.

Actually the hockey review isn't even out, but we know what it'll say and Hager clearly read the writing on the wall.

But - and here is why all sports fans should be worried - just what exactly have the Black Sticks achieved?

Remember after the review was announced a not inconsiderable number of former players who'd been coached by Hager came out supporting him.

They appeared to articulate what most of us were thinking.

The culture wasn't broken, it was just that the team had a bunch of people who didn't like the way they were treated. And instead of the old approach of "if you don't like it you know where the changing room is" we now need inquiries.

Because nowadays every upset is serious, every tear needs wiping, every grievance needs an inquiry.

But as hockey, like cycling and football, spent lord knows how much energy and money investigating the numerous agitations, what was so dangerously forgotten was the very reason these teams exist.

To win.

Elite sport is not about fun and giving it a go, it's about winning.

And the thing about Hager was that he was a winner.

He'd taken a side that was outside the world top 10 and taken them to number 3.

In other words he had done what elite coaches are hired to do - be victorious.

This was a side that was a genuine prospect at the world champs and Olympic games.

This was a side that outshone their male counterparts.

This was a side that was consistently putting not just hockey but women's sport on the map.

It was a success story.

Did it come at a high price? Presumably for some, hence the complaints.

So the upshot here, is those that couldn't hack it, whined, got listened to, and as a result they've lost their coach.

And where has that coach gone?

England - the current Olympic champions.

In others words Hager has landed a promotion - he's gone to coach a better side.

Now what does that tell you about our approach to winning and England's approach to winning?

And how will New Zealand hockey explain their approach and attitude when we next meet England (which isn't far off) and get spanked because they're a side that likes winning more than we do - and likes to hire the talent that can drive that philosophy.

Will they be happy to say, 'we may have lost, but at least all our players felt included?'

In bending over to accommodate the world's current fascination with touchy-feely political correctness. We run the risk of forgetting how to win, or worse, even wanting to.

So who won here? Mark Hager did.

No proof Government's jobs spending spree will work

The Government is on quite the spending spree ahead of our national day.

$100 million for the region up north, $20m for a local council and now some $80m for jobs. Not just up north for jobs - but for regions that are struggling. As always, like KiwiBuild, their rationale is sound - even if the delivery will prove problematic.

The country has been doing well when it comes to jobs. Whether it continues that way is another question for another day - but over the past decade we have worked ourselves into the globally envious position of basically having full employment.

But as is always the case growth and success is not universal. Some places have done better than others - hence the $82m.

But - and it's a but well worth considering - just what is the $82mgoing on? Like the $100m, just who is getting it - and what do they do with it?

That's the test of real government policy - not the announcement - anyone can pick a number and yell it from the rooftops. The real test is where it went and what sort of return you got from it.

And like KiwiBuild, the Government has quite rightly identified an area where governments can help. Hopefully, unlike KiwiBuild, it'll actually work.

Hawke's Bay, Bay of Plenty and Manawatu-Whanganui are targeted. Now that initially surprised me. Are they seriously telling us that Hawke's Bay and especially the Bay of Plenty aren't booming? Because they are.

And that's your first red flag: if you can't get work in a booming economy, there's something seriously askew. If you can't start a business, hustle for work, expand or grow - you most likely are doing something very wrong.

The money goes to a set of hubs that brings together government agencies. And right there is your next red flag. Lots of government agencies, being paid more to do what they really already should.

$21 million for 'regional connectivity schemes' - whatever that means. There are separate digital hubs, there is internet access for marae, and there is money to expand a couple of existing programmes to help young people who aren't doing anything - no training, no schooling and certainly no work - into work.

Now, ask yourself a simple question. If there is a problem - which there is - could that mean the existing programmes don't work? And if they don't, if giving them more money solving that?

Your simple reality of full employment, in a country that has been booming, is that if you're not part of the success, there will be profound and obvious reasons for it. Drugs, crime, attitude, motivation, and almost certainly - location.

At the end of the day, no amount of government money can get an employer to operate in a remote area, or employ unemployable people. And no government can create work where there isn't any, without permanent financial assistance - which is basically a subsidy.

And further, if these places haven't boomed in a decade of strong prosperity, how are they going to handle a slowdown? We've already begin to experience it.

The Government is going to find out that making the promise is easy and that, like KiwiBuild, actually doing it is beyond them.

MPs' pay freeze nothing more than PR fluff

In another massive piece of virtue signalling, MPs' wages are frozen because the system under which they operate doesn't work.

You can't complain about it because who would listen. You can't argue against it because they're right, the system doesn't work.

But in acknowledging they're high income earners, what are they saying? No one on a high income should be getting a pay rise? That their work doesn't warrant more money?

It doesn't really say anything, hence it's a PR exercise.

They have always been between a rock and a hard place, of course. The Remuneration Authority is independent, so no matter what they recommend it's always wrong.

We don't like politicians to start with, so any increases are egregious.

The same boring argument is had every year. Those who take it, those who give it away, those who argue it's fair enough. There can be, and are, no winners in that debate.

The real issue, of course, is they are all paid the same. And no system that operates that way is a fair one.

We have, as our representatives, the full selection of talent. From the exceptional to the incompetent, but their skill has nothing to do with remuneration.

A Cabinet minister gets the same whether you are a rock star or the buffoon.

And this is where the whole thing is a massive headline grab, not an answer.

Because what is your answer?

The Act Party, I think it was Rodney Hide, came up with a bulk funding idea. Pay a party a lump sum and they hand it out to MPs based on talent. Not a bad idea.

Potentially full of acrimony and because of it, political fall out. But at least it attempted to differentiate skill sets.

You can't have the decision in house because of bias reasons.

So as rudimentary as it appears, an independent authority is the best of a bunch of hard to swallow options.

You could, of course, do it like the old days. Make it a job without pay, but then you only attract the rich and idle.

But here's the ultimate irony: as much as Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern might want to have us believe they're top earners, the top of the top jobs, of which she holds one, should be earning, if they were paid proper market wages, well over a million bucks.

The average CEO, of which you could well argue any Cabinet minister is, is earning a seven-figure salary.

So in that context politicians aren't actually that well rewarded. That's because they would argue there is a service element involved, and they'd be right.

Which brings us back to the beginning. It's always tricky, there is no one-stop shop, magic bullet answer.

Which makes the freeze, and the review spin and PR, not a proper idea.

PM Jacinda Ardern faces a test on what to do with bumbling Jihadi Mark Taylor

Here comes a test for Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern - and sadly one, if initial comments are correct, she seems to have failed at the first hurdle.

What to do with our very own 'bumbling Jihadi' Mark Taylor? Mark Taylor, the Jihadi who gave away his location via social media. The Jihadi who, like so many of them that ended up in Syria, have ended up in jails now that the caliphate has crumbled.

And like so many of them, all of a sudden he is sorry, he was hot headed, and he wants to come home.

This is potentially the story of the year for the world. How many are there? Where do they come from? And how many get let back?

British Isis bride Shamima Begum seemed to collect the early international headlines with her pleadings. She had the advantage of a baby, but that didn't, quite rightly, stop the British Home Secretary Sajid Javid ripping up her citizenship. Even if he was wobbling on it, the polls gave him all the support he would have needed.

The premise is simple and most of us agree with it - you don't desert your country to go and help another destroy it.

Will the decision be made as easily here? Seems not, sadly. Taylor is already talking of life in prison if he's allowed back.

He's also doing what most of them appear to be doing. He wasn't a fighter per se. Isn't it amazing how many of them wandered off to join the battle, and yet didn't actually do any battling. What did they have? A large camp full of onlookers? A cheer squad?

The only sad part about all this is the naivety and stupidity that so many seem to suffer from. Taylor claims he was a bit hot headed, and he's sorry for causing too much trouble.

Do you think he'd be quite as humbled if the war was actually getting won from his side of things?

One of these fighters missed his mum, pasties, and Doctor Who. It's sort of pathetic.

Was this a caliphate of mummies' boys who thought they were being a bit gung-ho. Was it a pub dare? Some of them seem stupid enough to have been those sort of victims.

So what does Ardern do? You know what she wants to do. Helen Clark has already tweeted about Begum, saying you can't leave a person stateless.

Well actually you can, you just have to want to, and Britain has. Let them rot in Syria, where they so willingly chose to go.

Oh, you'll incur the wrath of the United Nations. But what would you rather have, a wagging finger or a crazed jihadist who's vowed to annihilate you, in the prison down the road, with knowing this country sadly, a not unreasonable chance of parole for good behaviour?

You know that Ardern would let him in, you know she's driven by UN-type doctrines. She'd probably put him on the job-seeker benefit and tell him to take his time looking for work.

Javid has started the international response well, America has done similar things, but is facing the inevitable legal challenges.

If there is a weak socialist link here it is, sadly, us. We won't have the same resolve, we won't, I don't think, even want to have the same resolve.

So Mark Taylor, jihadist and traitor, you want him back? And what are you going to say when Ardern says he's welcome home?

Why shouldn't Ryan Fox and Mariah Carey work in Saudi Arabia?

Golfer Ryan Fox and singer Mariah Carey seemed to have incurred the wrath of many and suffered perhaps a slightly uncomfortable weekend.

Not a couple of names normally uttered in the same sentence, but both have associations with Saudi Arabia.

He's in a tournament as we speak, and she's been holding concerts there. The upset of course is that, according to some, Saudi Arabia is a social or moral or political pariah and what we need is mass boycott.

What we need is the Ryan Foxes and Mariah Careys shunning them and their money. For the argument goes, they are being used by the kingdom to promote normality, international participation and a certain amount of branding. Ryan Fox of course has not been singled out per se - the argument applies to everyone in the field.

Of course the upset and angsting is futile, not to mention at least in part hypocritical.

Do we all agree with what Saudi Arabia does and how they conduct themselves in certain spheres and aspects of life? No we do not.

But if that is the criteria for boycott and isolation then we would be doing very little and never leaving home. The globe, rightly or wrongly, is festooned with activity that many don't condone. Golfers, singers, and you and I, are making not one jot of difference to any of it.

A lot of it - not all - is cultural, meaning just because we don't like it, doesn't make it wrong. We also seem to forget that in isolating out the famous people for attention and some sort of action, we place upon them a role most did not ask for - that of activist.

Ryan Fox said he has a job to do, and he does. Fox isn't a civil rights campaigner, or a political operative. He's a golfer. And he goes where the work is.

It would seem remarkable, would it not, that we expect Fox or Carey to make a point to the Saudi Arabians when the president of the United States doesn't. Most countries don't, and most counties don't because of the cold, hard simple truth about the way the world operates.

Saudi Arabia has money and oil and influence - and the more of those things you have, the more you can get away with it. Oh nations make noises - but in full knowledge that the noises mean nothing they just look good.

They're seen to be doing the right thing, even if in reality it's nothing tangible. And if we are to wander down the track of righteous indignation at those who we don't agree with then travel to China is off, holidays in Hong Kong are gone, trips to South Africa are a no-go - how long do you want that list to be?

If it's good for Fox and Carey surely it must be good for us? How could you sit in Denarau all those years while the Fijian people were oppressed?

It's easy to ask of others what we wouldn't - and don't - of ourselves, isn't it.

Don't panic - the All Blacks are still the best team in the world

No one likes to see the All Blacks lose - but if you're going to lose, one: you want to lose in a game to remember.

Two: You want to lose to a side that most would argue were the better team.

Three: You want to lose to a side that were seen as genuine respectable contenders going in.

Four: You want to lose to a side that represents a region that is closing what has been regarded as a chasm, in terms of talent.

Five: You want to lose because globally it's good for the game, especially going into a World Cup year.

What you don't want to do when you lose is panic or overanalyse it. It is not the end of the world.

I suppose you could argue it's not been the best of years for the All Blacks, they lost twice. But at the risk of overanalysing all this, there are losses, and there are losses.

The South African loss this year wasn't a proper loss. The South Africans are not a team we may lose to again for many years.

It's the same as our 2016 loss to the Irish in Chicago. That was an odd venue on the way to a proper tour of the northern hemisphere. It had the feel of a one-off as opposed to what we saw yesterday morning, which was a proper game, in proper circumstances, with appropriate build-up and expectation.

We were properly beaten, it was a genuine loss as opposed to a ropey fluke.

Now, such is the way of things these days, when defeat befalls us too many tend to lose perspective. You only need to look at Australia or England to know this, and England and Australia have had real troubles.

And people like Eddie Jones, who was a hero and great redeemer, needed to be sacked until he seemed to improve England to the level we saw last week. Michael Cheika, who's in charge of a genuinely troubled side, barely holds on to his job on a weekly basis.

So for the All Blacks let's be sensible about this. No it's not the way you want to end the year, and no, two losses isn't a great season.

But we are still, game in, game out, the best side in the world. I'd still back us to win the World Cup.

And I would not be, beyond the bounds of some regular retrospective investigation as to what we need to work on to improve, remotely worried about next year.

New Year, same old KiwiBuild stuff-ups

In a "did we really go on holiday or did the same weird stuff keep on happening this whole time" kind of way, we have the resignation Friday of Stephen Barclay who until he quit, was the boss of KiwiBuild.

Well "boss", Phil Twyford is, of course, the ultimate boss of this calamitous exercise in construction futility. But Barclay apparently, until Friday, ran things operationally.

Although we don't even know that, given no one is fronting in terms of just what has gone wrong. It was an "operational matter" until it became an "employment matter". They could, of course, potentially be the same thing, who would know.

What it is though, is yet another cock-up in a long line of cock-ups that's plagued this grandiose farce since day one.

Barclay allegedly hadn't been at work for months, no one confirms or denies any of that either.

And this is what they do when they know full well it's a mess, they duck for cover.

In the most open honest and transparent Government we have ever seen, just where are the relevant operators to shed light on exactly what's happened to Barclay and presumably a shed-load of taxpayers' money, our money?

Was he paid to do nothing? Was he paid out? Why did he quit? Was he pushed? If so, why was he pushed? Why after such a spectacularly short period of time do we not have a boss of the biggest policy the Government has? Given it's public money, why the silence? Where is the accountability?

One of two things happened, either he didn't like it, didn't want it, and couldn't bail fast enough. Or he wasn't liked, wasn't competent, didn't do the job, and they wanted him out.

No one eaves this sort of job under this sort of cloak and dagger arrangement if things have gone well, KPIs have been met, and goodwill abounds.

This is quite obviously a mess.

And it's a mess that is now top of the pile of the rest of the mess that is KiwiBuild, the homes that aren't built, the homes that don't sell, the tenders that don't attract bidders, the prices that are too high, the locations that don't parent right, the sizes that don't suit.

It's all promises that don't come within a million miles of adding up.

New Year, same old cock-up.

So much for 'see you later agitators'

Looks like it's crunch time for business and the Government.

Having been sucked into wandering along to select committees under the guise of open consultation, the reality has finally dawned on them that they have been had, and they are angry.

The Employers and Manufacturers Association calls it a slap in the face, which it is, but it was always coming, the thing they fear most from this government is now reality.

Labour market reform is the thing that has driven the confidence numbers to decade long lows, it is the singular thing that has been coming from this government that business fears quite rightly, will tangibly lead to trouble at the office.

The select committee has reported back and the reforms as put forward remain unchanged as they were always going to be.

Select committees are a long established con whereby you state your case in the belief someone might hear it, think it's a good idea and do something with it.

In reality it's worse than a casino, all the odds are in the house's favour, those on the committee are stacked on the government's side and they are not for moving.

So, what's coming our way?

Well in simple terms, the return of the unions, a return to industry-wide pay deals, some wacky law that somehow forces you to cut a deal no matter how far apart you may be, and the king hit - the end of the 90-day trials.

And it's that one that has most of us upset and for very good reason.

The changes around unions. to be fair. have not yet happened. Yes we have been there before and yes it was a mess and yes most of us would not want to go back. But it is possible it might be different this time (stop laughing).

In other words, if you were being really level-handed you could say let's suck it and see. Let's see if it's as bad as we think, given it's not yet been implemented.

But the 90-day trials are here, they have been a part of the landscape for a number of years and have been a success, they have created jobs, and to take that away is a hopelessly naive mistake.

Why you would want to upend a system that gets people off the dole and into a job, that gives them skills and a chance I have no idea.

The research shows those who get hired stay, they prosper.

The research shows the employers who may or may not have taken the risk on a hire, took a leap of faith under the 90-day law, and by and large the job has stuck.

In other words, if it ain't broke, why smash it up.

Once again, to be fair, the entire 90-day law is not being undone, but that's only because New Zealand First saved it, once again showing that of the three heads running the place they are increasingly looking like the most middle of the road.

Here's what I know about business. Business does best when it's left to get on with it, when the rules, red tape and regulation are cleared out of the way, when the government isn't forever in your office telling you what to do.

Here's what I also know. Unions are wreckers, they have no one's interests at heart but their own.

When in ascendancy the strikes go up, the aggro increases, the threats become a part of life.

Maybe I had too many school holidays as a kid waiting for the Cook Strait ferry that never sailed.

Maybe I have seen in my own workplaces the biggest agitators and the ones who complain and moan the loudest, are the unionised ones.

What this government inherited when it comes to the workplace was a world-class operation, a rock star economy.

Ask yourself whether these new reforms are going to enhance that and take it to the next level, or apply a massive, naive, union-led handbrake.

Pride Parade organisers a bunch of bitter idiots

Does this year's award for cocking up, destroying goodwill, and reputation, go to Auckland's Gay Pride Parade organisers?

The police are out, the Defence Force is out, funding is cut. You could not have orchestrated a greater, or more spectacular, undermining of your brand if you were the enemy and had launched a PR jihad.

The Pride Parade has always struck me, especially in recent years, as slightly incongruous. I think it's broadly accepted that the dark days of overt discrimination, segregation and general weirdness around being gay is long gone. And as such the broad based campaign that gay people are regular, everyday people has been won.

In other words the debate is over - so let's get on with it.

But on an annual basis we still needed to have specific, and deliberate events that reminded us that perhaps it wasn't over, that perhaps gay people needed to be seen as different, unique or whatever it was they were parading about.

You can't have it both ways: being gay is either no big deal, or it is still a big deal. Given it isn't, why draw attention to it down a main street?

It's why we don't have gender marches or religious parades, people are who they are, we are all happy with that, so argument over.

But no, in a sign that in so many of those modern, touchy-feely sort of issues, it's never over. We have what are clearly an incendiary group of people, riddled with angst, anger, resentment, and presumably a whole series of issues a psychiatrist could busy themselves with for years, who are determined to blow the whole thing up.

And the police of all people? The police are nothing but supporters, they make as great a community contribution as you could ever possibly expect. But no we hate the uniform, so they're out.

That decision was never going to win anyone over, and tragically is proof that there are those that don't want to let go of the past.

Were there issues? Presumably yes. But they're long gone, and most of us recognise that.

But for those who give time to these sorts of arguments and debates, for those who are perhaps lulled into a sense that time is progress, in too many cases, for too many people that simply isn't true.

They don't want closure, they don't want resolution, they don't want all the things they pretend to want, like cooperation, understanding, support, guidance, and acceptance.

They want to be bitter, and they want to be bitter forever. They want to be defined by their misery.

So they end up with a parade in tatters, a reputation wrecked, and a fight they could never win.

The rest of us shaking our heads, and seeing them for what they are.

A knockout blow for acceptable racism

Having dug themselves the most spectacular hole, just what was it that Whanganui High School were going to do but acquiesce and allow all their students into the Joseph Parker talk?

And in acquiescing I assume it lays bare what can only be described as a lie, as to who wanted the so-called closed session.

They claimed it was Parker, Parker said it wasn't him. I believe Parker.

And I believe the boxer because the school, through one of its trustees, went on to defend the closed session nature of the talk.

In other words the only people allowed in were Māori or Pasifika.

And what is that? That is racism, pure and simple.

And what made it worse was the fact they thought that was okay and they defended it. And they defended it, the way they always defend such nonsense.

It is their duty to give Māori and Pasifika opportunities. Yes it is - but not at the exclusion of others based on race.

It is Māori and Pasifika who are disadvantaged. Possibly, but you don't lift them up by being a racist.

The trouble is, this sort of thing is getting too prevalent.

Last year on the telly I criticised a mayor who wanted to introduce Māori seats on councils - I said he was out of touch with middle New Zealand.

I said that because votes have been held on such matters, and broadly speaking in areas where those votes have been held, a large majority of people rejected the idea.

So in other words it was more fact and less opinion, but that didn't stop the PC brigade, who you would have thought from their reaction I had set the Treaty document itself alight.

"Casual racism" is what they called it. I was called stronger things on social media. But that's social media, the home of the bewildered, lost, and angry.

But where was the upset this time? The parents were incandescent, as they should have been.

But where was the Race Relations Commissioner? Where were all the usual suspects who can't grab a headline fast enough, when the plight of the poor old Māori or Pacific Islander appears, in some way shape or form, to be compromised?

What if Joe Parker was talking to an elite school of privileged, European kids and anyone else that wasn't in the top team or top class were banned?

If it was a closed session to all but the elites you know what would have happened.

And this sadly is the country we live in now, where racism of any sort is leapt upon with vehemence, unless it's racism that suits you.

And this was racism that suited Whanganui. And not only were they racist in their approach, they were dishonest about it as well.

Yes it is solved, thank goodness, because Joe and his story is worth listening to. But it was always worth listening to by everyone.

Joe's story isn't about race, it's about success - and success is for all of us.

'Jihadist' Jami-Lee Ross self-detonates

This is why they have the saying, "you can't write this stuff". Because, you can't write this stuff.

You'd buy tickets for a show like this.

And whoever thought that it would be the National Party? The 'we are one, we are rock solid, we are all in this together,' National Party.

The party that mocked Labour, their leaks and disunity, now in the middle of the most spectacular meltdown any of us who have been watching this stuff can remember.

Richard Prebble, Roger Douglas, and David Lange was good. Winston Peters and Jenny Shipley wasn't quite as good. But none of them threw the corruption grenade that Jami-Lee Ross has thrown. So he sets the record.

He quits and forces a byelection, we've seen that. But for good measure is off apparently to the police today with recordings and accusations galore.

The best that can come of this for National is that the police thing goes nowhere. And Simon Bridges' answering of that was as solid and resolute as you can get, as far as I could see.

Then the byelection is held and Ross is humiliated. And that over a relatively short period of time Ross very quickly isolates himself out as a deranged, isolated, conspiratorialist that we all end up seeing what he is - and perhaps feeling slightly sorry for.

In other words when it's this spectacular and this rogue, once the glare of the explosion wears off, we all dust ourselves down and get on with life.

Ross has done the right thing by everyone in quitting and not dragging this out by him remaining as an independent, that would have been truly ugly.

And having seen others hang on before, the Alamein Kopus and Brendan Horans, all it does is bring the game, as well as the individual, into some sort of disrepute.

So if that's how it plays out, then Bridges may well get through this unscathed. In the sense I don't think anyone in their right mind can sheet back this level of madness to a leader and their direction.

Apart from the fact, and this part Bridges can't escape, how is it possible you can have a bloke in your ranks this high up the tree, remembering Ross was at seven on the list, and then out of nowhere have him explode like this?

Disgruntled backbenchers yes, massive changes in policy or direction yes, a growing rumbling or underbelly of discontent, yes.

But from so far out of left field you literally see none of it coming that, you're so confident that you publicly, deliberately, and clearly and with a fist-pounding assurity declare your party is rock solid, and there are no leaks in your ranks.

And yet right next to you is the jihadist, how do you miss that?

Bad for business - Government's gas, oil exploration ban a pig of an idea

Energy Minister Megan Woods gave Taranaki a visit yesterday, under what really can be only described as trying circumstances.

Taranaki, being the home of oil and gas, is the most affected region as a result of the Government's madcap scheme to end all off-shore oil exploration. Taranaki thrives on energy and dairy, so one imagines the old Labour-Green support base these days is fairly limited.

And it's where the rubber hits the road on the theory vs reality. Does Taranaki simply "transition out of dairy and energy" and into something more green, just like that?

Because that's how easily it's explained by the theorists who have spent too much time in a lecture theatre in front of a whiteboard, and not enough time in the real world.

She was defensive going in as well. And in that defensiveness, is the exposure of the madness of the thinking. She said don't worry, it's not like we're turning the lights out today - current licences will not be cancelled, there will be drilling for years to come.

Which is true, the decision is for future contracts not current ones. But in saying that, and expecting us all to breathe a sigh of relief, fails the basic test on Business 101 - and how investment intention is conducted.

Business plans ahead. It likes certainty, it likes to know where it is at. They like a plan. When they have those things, they gain confidence, when you're confident you spend money.

You look to grow and expand, you look to take advantage of the investment already in place and leverage off it. That's why regions grow the way they grow. One bloke plants a grape vine, the rest follow, you've got a wine industry.

Business springs up around the original operator, once it's seen there is a future. Why would you invest in a region whose main income drivers are being curtailed? Does

Megan honestly think through her comments that life will simply go on as it has, until every licence is used up and at that point we turn out the lights? Businesses' intention will have dried up years beforehand. People looking to move to the region won't, because what's the future?

The future is uncertain, spending decisions will be delayed if not dropped. As the consequences of those very specific decisions get felt, the rot sets in, the jobs market contracts and shrinks, business stalls then falters - slowly things start to freeze up and go backwards.

Remembering there is an end point, when the licences are finished, so is oil and gas. It goes from an industry of potential and exploration to a sunset one - where the end is coming and it has a date. Whether that date is today, next year or 10 years doesn't matter, the same drivers apply.

And the result of those drivers doesn't change. If you don't think it's true, look at any small town in this country where the main industry has disappeared, and ask yourself whether what's replaced it has done so in the same size and revenue ? The mayor said it's a kick in the guts of the region, he is right.

A pig dressed up is still a pig, Megan is fooling no one.

Screaming about climate change won't work

Christina Bu has been in the country and found herself somewhat bewildered.

Bu is the head of the Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association, and as such comes from a world of subsidy. When it comes to EVs, no-one hands out free stuff like Norway.

Cash grants, subsidies, tax write-offs, free public transport, free bus lane use and free charging. It's Christmas every day in Norway if you want to get behind the wheel of a Nissan Leaf.

So she can't understand our antagonism towards what she calls "feebate"-type incentives.

Of course she can't, the same way Julie Anne Genter can't understand what's wrong with buying kids' bikes, and sending the Government round to teach you how to ride them.

When you come from a world, or a mindset, where the Government pays for everything, our sort of free-market level playing field "success on its merits" outlook must seem awfully strange.

I am sure European farmers still look at us aghast at the fact we have to grow and sell everything for what it's worth, as opposed to what we want it to be worth topped up with subsidies and tariffs.

A little irony though: Norway's obsession and generosity around the EV is, of course, funded from oil, from which they are happy to collect revenues.

Perhaps we should have thought of that before we put the kibosh on exploration, and watched them slowly but surely pack up, leave, and take with them their exploration fees that put millions upon millions into our coffers.

It seems these days we are awash with pressure groups formed as a result of "issues".

There is a global chinwag underway on climate change this very week, and it's the usual story. Kyoto was a bust, Paris is a bust, so now it's urgent. We must act immediately, the problem is even worse than we thought.

Just this week as well, we had plastic alarm bells. Recycling won't solve our problems, we need to act urgently, and do more than ever.

And the poor old EV, sold as a utopian solution to fossil fuels, has failed, like all the other dramatic life-threatening episodes we face, to take off the way the peddlers of this sort of misery would have hoped. So now they resort to the time-honoured tradition of expecting Governments - through the poor old taxpayer - to pick up the tab.

The raising of the issues didn't work, the warnings didn't work, the alarmist warnings didn't work, the screaming from the roof tops didn't work. We simply haven't - in the numbers required - got on board, whether through laziness, deep suspicion, or outright rejection.

From the air, to plastic, to cars, the Christina Bu's of the world don't get us. All they have left are virtue-signalling Governments who are still open to using other people's money to fund their largesse.

Coalition has held together and prospered

Candles tomorrow for this government. One year ago tomorrow, it all began.

The photo they released last week marking the one-year anniversary of the announcement of the coalition as opposed to the commencement of the coalition, is worth looking up if you missed it.

I assume they released it to give insight into the joy of victory, although sadly all I saw was a picture of a couple of key players, ie Jacinda Adern and Grant Robertson, with nothing else in their lives at that moment than the cold, hard reality that all that they count as important was in the hands of a bloke who managed to gather up just 7 per cent of the vote.

Their faces said it all, this moment was the centre of their universe, all they held dear, and they had no control over it whatsoever.

MMP had cast them out as bystanders to a minor organisation that through the foibles of the system puts all the power in the wrong hands.

Anyway, it's worth a look if for no other reason than to remind us that for all you might want to argue is good about MMP, that moment in time certainly wasn't one of them.

But, and here's the good news, one year in and this current arrangement surely has the right to a glass of something celebratory.

It is, as they've reminded us many times, our first truly MMP government, and with it came the inherent risks of carnage, none of which has happened.

The three-headed monster the previous government warned us of, has been nowhere to be seen.

This is not to say the government hasn't had its tough days, in fact they've probably had more of those sort of days than (a) they would've liked and (b) really should've had, given they've made the job hard work for themselves.

Labour in particular, probably because they're the largest party, have looked overtly inept. They clearly weren't expecting to be government, and have looked like it.

They've lost two ministers, both women to hopelessly unnecessary matters.

They look shallow in terms of talent, probably because they are, and have struggled with policy ... most notably their ability to win the business community across.

But, they've collectively not just held together, they have in many respects prospered.

There has barely been a hint of dissent, there was a minor verbal skirmish or two around migration and refugees from Winston, who it was suggested might be looking to play his hand a little more overtly.

But when it came to the stuff they had to swallow, everyone has played their part.

From the Greens giving water bottling plants the green light, to the oil ban for New Zealand First to the waka bill for Labour, each party has had to face the simple reality of a multi-party deal; not all you want you get, and not all you do you like.

But at no point in the past 12 months have we had the slightest sniff of scandal, upset, tantys, stamping of feet, or disunity.

This has been a coalition that has set the standard.

The gaps in philosophy especially among Labour and New Zealand First are wide in places, but they have not allowed it to be an issue.

It might have helped that the Greens are a minor, almost outside sort of group within the deal, but if you were looking to mark this lot on their performance in terms of cohesiveness and professionalism, and staying on message, and out of coalition-type trouble, you'd be being churlish to mark them any less than an eight or maybe even a nine out of 10.

Why should we pay for Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern's ad agency?

Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has given her first statement to the UN General Assembly.

How about Jacinda Ardern?

So the trip to New York was a PR exercise, there's no question about that. And if there was any benefit of her going to the United Nations Leaders Week, it was to fly the flag for the country.

Small nation, we box above our weight, a lot of people are interested, she turns up in American media, that's all good for the country. There's no doubt about that.

But what we didn't realise is she had an ad agency in tow - that you and I are paying for.

A crew of three, from some agency called Augusto, which has a New York office. And basically they just wandered around filming her, and photographing her.

And it's not unusual for a leader to be photographed, but normally it's the office staff who do it. You know, get the ol' phone out and take a few snaps.

She had a whole ad agency with her, and she's defending it. Because they're building up library stock and you know what they're building up library stock for. They're building it up for the election, and the election campaign.

It will be Ardern and Trudeau. It will be Ardern and Trump. It will be Ardern at the UN. And you and I have paid for all of this.

They think, National, this is against the rules. Ardern defends it.

She says it's paid for out of Labour's Leader's Budget. And so you're supposed to go 'oh whew, well that's okay then'.

But who supplies Labour's Leader's Budget? We do. It's all taxpayer money.

You and I have paid for an ad agency of three people, and what do you reckon that costs?

Ardern says it's not expensive. But she wouldn't have a clue, because she doesn't give any numbers.

She says it's not excessive. But she wouldn't have a clue.

This is the party that spends $1.6 million on three days to chat about justice.

So three people from an ad agency, wandering around in New York.
And you and I have paid for that.

I've read between the lines on Karel Sroubek case - Iain Lees-Galloway is a buffoon

So what the Karel Sroubek case hung on was the insistence by Iain Lees-Galloway, and the Prime Minister, that there was something so stupendous in the files that we simply couldn't know about, that would make it all clear as to why what appeared to be a catastrophically bad decision was actually made.

The Prime Minister told us to read between the lines, we did. It would seem the claim was his life was in danger in the Czech Republic.

Even if that was ever true, so what? Why was that our problem? Why, when we knew he lied to get into the country, why, when he hung out with the gangs, imported the drugs, and ended up in jail, did Immigration Minister Iain Lees-Galloway think that deserved residency?

And we came to all that information early - in fact it was weeks ago. We were faster than the Government. We had all the facts and we concluded there was nothing here to see, there was no magic bullet.

This "absolute discretion" was absolute bollocks.

And then it got worse - Lees-Galloway hadn't read the file properly, he hadn't asked for legal advice, he'd taken at best 45 minutes to make the call. He had painted himself well and truly to be inept and incompetent.

But still I said, I was more than prepared for the rabbit in the hat. It looked like incompetence, it looked like a political nightmare, Lees-Galloway looked out of his depth, but if he pulls that rabbit where it all makes sense then fair enough.

There was no rabbit, there wasn't even a hat, it wasn't even a trick. It was just laziness and arrogance by a buffoon who wouldn't accept his work and carry the can for it.

Lees-Galloway put weight on a plea from Sroubek's wife, who turned out to be estranged. He didn't know Sroubek had travelled back to the Czech Republic.

But who cares? By placing too much weight on a bogus fear for his life, whether he travelled, didn't make any difference anyway.

All that nonsense about him being no real threat, about being a decent bloke reformed, so what? He lied to get here, then peddled drugs, and is in prison. That prevents residency in anyone's minds - anyone's except Lees-Galloway.

So it's off to court, which means more money and more time. And what if the Government loses? Does anyone pay for that? Of course they don't.

This honest and transparent Government is suffering the emperor's clothes scenario, they're full of it.

And what of all the cases for residency that are genuine? That don't involve drug dealing, lying, and jail time? Having set the bar so low, do they all get to stay? Of course they don't.

This as it turns out, as we said all along, was not complex. It was open and shut, except given Lees-Galloway is so useless, he took the gun and blew his foot off.

And even then refuses to accept it is him, and him alone, that should be reflecting from the back benches.

Paula Bennett perfectly highlights Govt's insidious approach to benefits

Paula Bennett has put together a sterling piece for the Whanganui Chronicle in which

who appears to have had a crack at her over her weight and weight loss.

Now I say appears because I didn't see the original, and given this isn't actually about the original, I don't need to go seeking it. For the cleverness in the Bennett response is that it isn't actually about the original. It's a party political piece snuck in under cover of a response to the original.

And, to be frank, the original appears from what Bennett suggests, to be a petty, nasty little bit of work that attacks the person not the ball. I have no time for such behaviour.

Bennett begins by saying she sucks up a lot, ignores most of it, the cost of her weight loss operation was nothing like the figure quoted, the dress in the photo was, in fact cheap, and that as the spokesperson for women for National she's proud of her role.

But then the genius starts, it goes from a response to an election pitch, and notably what her and her party have done for women generally, and the country as a whole. Part of the overall pitch is a nugget of gold so bright Byron would have been proud.

She talks of the 11,000 more New Zealanders this current government has let on the jobseeker benefit, something we have raised a number of times.

The criteria for the benefit is you are able to work, yet can't find any. Now, that immediately to most of us is absurd, because this country for the past several years has been in the depths of a crisis in industry after industry looking for labour, and not being able to find it.

So why the 11,000 more? The answer Bennett tells us, the government changed the rules. It doesn't sanction people who repeatedly don't turn up for appointments and has no expectation that those on jobseeker support can find work, or can earn a living. This, says Bennett is cruel, and she is right.

Then the nugget of gold. It comes from new MP Agnes Loheni, who in her maiden speech said the soft bigotry of low expectation that rips hope from our children, destroys faith in their ability to overcome life's obstacles, creates jealousy, and envy in our kids is wrong.

What a brilliant way of putting it. "The soft bigotry of low expectation." And that is the aspiration of this government, isn't it? You don't want to turn up for a work interview? No problem.

They've done the same with state housing. They temporarily got rid of tenancy reviews. You can pay your way with your new income, or changed circumstances. No rush, stay as long as you like while the queue of genuine cases grows to the record 10,000 we heard about last week.

The soft bigotry of low expectation. They milk that from those who don't want better for themselves.

The encouragement is replaced by the handout, with the long term hope the handout pays for the vote. The more entrapped you make people, the more beholden they are to the state, the more likely they are to vote for you.

It's an insidious and dangerous attitude and approach, but we are watching it in action. And it took a person calling Paula Bennett out for it to be encapsulated so well in her response.

Look it up if only to re-read the line, "the soft bigotry of low expectation".

Nothing will come from another mental health inquiry

You know the biggest problem with mental health in this country? We keep saying the same things, talking the same talk, making the same noises - and doing the exact same thing as a result of it all.

Which is largely nothing.

The latest report was out yesterday and it said what every other report says. The Government, who have turned ordering reports into a fine art, are going to get caught out by this, by the way, because mental health was one of their big ticket issues they wanted to tackle - mental health is almost always one of the big ticket issues.

It's one of those subjects you have to be serious about, say the right things about, and put an earnest look on your brow every time you talk about it. But the superficiality of it all surely by now is wearing thin, surely by now we can all see the hypocrisy around this issue.

I watched the news last night in dismay, as yet again we got "extensive coverage", with yet again the same tired series of so-called experts saying the same old tired things they've said for 20 years. More money, more resources, ban ads for booze, attack booze, deal to booze, booze is the problem.

And then cue a few social workers relaying tales of doom and overwork.

And the Government, having kicked the issue for touch when they called for the report, is suddenly faced with the obvious question when it arrives: what are you going to do about it?

Oh damn, answers? Hmmm, answers. Well Health Minister David Clark's answer was that he will look at it over summer and reconvene in March.

The Prime Minister, in the way only the Prime Minister does, gives her best earnest look and says "I look forward to hearing what the public has to say".

The public? They just had their say, thousands of them. But that's them isn't it? Lots and lots and lots of words, consultation, and back and forward rhetoric. There isn't a problem that can't be jawboned to death.

And then once we'd heard from all the usual suspects, with all the usual one-liners and meaningful requests, the cold hard reality was laid out, the way the cold hard reality has been laid out the dozens of times before.

But when we go down this rabbit hole of mental health, what's going to get done? Nothing.

The political will isn't there, the public support isn't there. It's the issue we want to be seen taking seriously without actually addressing, because it's too hard, too complex and too expensive.

So appease ourselves with reports, look up how many reports we've commissioned into the mental health over the past 30 years, and then ask yourself why we still have a problem.

Then re-read this, and tell me I am wrong.

End of innocence - maybe our gun laws are hopelessly naive

I can tell you, having done a few bits and pieces on international radio these past couple of days, that the world has genuinely been interested in what this country is facing.

But like most things in life if you follow the global headlines, you will have seen those headlines have diminished, moved down the page, the bulletin, or disappeared altogether. It says nothing of the gravity or enormity of the Christchurch event. It is a simple reminder that the world turns, and life goes on.

The same way we didn't spend as much time on Manchester as Manchester did, or Norway, or Orlando, or any of the other American mass shootings.

Which is one of the more ironic things you feel when you're on American radio, as I was yesterday.

Knowing their relationship with guns, their amendments, their debates, their history, knowing all that and trying to explain what is it we do with guns, and what we are looking to change, feels like a mixture of innocence and simplicity.

We don't have people that carry guns for protection, this is news to them. I was asked about our relationship with the gun. I get what they meant, but we don't really have one. We don't cite amendments and our rights the way they do.

We say, 'well, we like to shoot deer, or get rid of rabbits on farms'. Then I heard myself explaining how we don't have a gun register, don't track ammunition, can pimp up our guns without trace. It all sounded so hopelessly naive, like what the hell have we been thinking?

But then I cite the numbers: yes we have a lot of guns, but we don't shoot people with them.

The great debate in America is the more guns are available, the more mass death goes on. Well that's not true here, we have one gun per three people, which is not as many as America. But if the equation was accurate you would have concluded we should have dealt with a lot more gun crime than we already do.

Our police are not routinely armed, you can also hear the shock in the host's silence down the line.

All of this is of course good. This tiny, little country at the bottom of the world is known in a very passing sort of way by many, not unlike our passing knowledge of Boston or Kansas City.

But I tell you what I also tell each interviewer, that the accused 28-year-old mosque gunman with no obvious income was travelling extensively to North Korea, Pakistan, Bosnia, Montenegro and Turkey, and yet wasn't on any radar. They react the same way I did - and in that I am fearful is the real key to this.

If I can see it, if the interviewers can see it, seems unusual if not alarming. Did we even have a radar on?

But mostly the interview ends with how impressed they are by the outpouring of love and support they have seen.

I tell them it's the advantage of a small and close-knit country. Big events literally stop it in its tracks. You know when you join others from the outside looking in, in conversation, you realise there is a lot to be proud of.

This is a lame hit job on Simon Bridges

What a hit job last night on TV3 on Simon Bridges.

Here's what they ran. The National leader's expenses have been leaked. All expenses are coming out eventually, these have been leaked, you've got to ask where they were leaked from and why they were leaked.

Travel and accommodation for three months for Bridges: $113,000 - $83,000 was spent travelling up and down the country in a Crown limo.

It equates, said Newshub – listen to this, this is the kind of crap you get these days in political journalism - to $919 a day, more than people earning the minimum wage take home in the week

So what? Lots of things happen every day that cost more than people earning the minimum wage take home in a week. The two aren't connected.

You can argue whether or not it was effective, but as a new person in the job, what is Simon Bridges supposed to do?

You're supposed to get out and meet people. How do you get out and meet people? You want him to walk? You want him to ring people? You want him to get a party line installed and 20 people get him on the phone

What do you want him to do to communicate with people, to hear what's going on in the country, and understand all of this - and presumably before the next election and put out a bit of policy.

What else is he supposed to do but get in a car?

If he hired a private jet, you might have an argument - but he got in a car and drove around the country.

What else is he supposed to do?

My Cabinet reshuffle - The good ministers and the inept, incompetent and invisible

From the 'I am here to help' file, why don't we look at the pending Cabinet reshuffle? Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has decided we will get one after the budget in May. Why then? I have no idea.

But the good thing about the reshuffle, having had a look at the current line up, is there is plenty of reshuffling to be done.

The further good news is the reality of government is you only need a handful of really competent operators to actually make things function, the rest is largely made up of do gooders, try-hards, and party hacks.

This Government's executive is large, larger than they said it would be, and could be for efficiencies sake trimmed down. And also to a degree some of the dead wood has already been removed in the form of Clare Curran and Meka Whaitiri, who would have made the "let's move them sideways" list anyway.

How about we start with the talent? We stick initially with Labour given that's the part the Prime Minister controls - she's not reshuffling Winston is she?

Grant Robertson, Megan Woods, Andrew Little, Stuart Nash, and Kris Faafoi are those who have performed.

Now do remember this is not about whether you agree with policy or direction, it's to do with performance within the portfolios, based on what they're there to deliver.

All the aforementioned have profile, have been active, have looked in control - and have a reassuring presence about them. All of them, most likely, could move to other areas and not make a fool of themselves.

I would put David Parker in there, but I've not seen enough of him to be sure, he's one of a number who could be good, you just wouldn't know. The heaviest hitter, portfolio wise, I have not mentioned is David Clark in health. He's not a disaster, but he's not exactly been omnipresent. I would have thought health is too important to have such a low profile.

And then we come to the trouble, Kelvin Davis, Phil Twyford, Nanaia Mahuta, Iain Lees-Galloway, Aupito William Sio and Willie Jackson. All are either useless, inept, incompetent, or invisible, and I think if you follow the game you'll be pretty aware as to who fits into what category.

For what it's worth, just because I can, and Ardern can't, I'll take a crack.

As far as the Greens are concerned, they do suffer the plight of the low profile and being outside the coalition per se. But James Shaw is good, Julie Anne Genter is rabid (but at least passionate), the rest have made no impact. I would have thought that was a concern.

In New Zealand First, Winston is having his best term not just in government but probably in Parliament. Ron Mark is solid, and Shane Jones, love him or hate him, you can't ignore him and he's made an impact. The rest? Non-events but, given the size of their caucus, that's a pretty high proportion of performers.

So the good news for the Prime Minister is, if she's serious, and that's a massive question mark given her lack of leadership in things like the Lees-Galloway, Phil Twyford and Curran debacles, but if she's serious, she's got plenty of room for movement.

She's got a half decent number of solid performers keeping things ticking over. Only question is, and it's the test of all political parties, if she moves the dead wood, is there undiscovered talent there ready for promotion?

The Shchetkova family is the proof our immigration system is a farce

What wonderful reaction we got to the plight of the Shchetkova family yesterday. They run a restaurant, a successful one by all accounts, and they're about to be booted out of the country.

Now this isn't the first time we've heard this story, it's come in many guises - many families from different countries, different plights, but the overall effect is the same.

You appear on the surface to have decent people being given a bum wrap, the last case was the South African family last year with the child with an unusual medical condition. The condition hadn't actually presented itself in terms of needing hospital care, the family offered to foot the bill if it did, but no, they were gone.

In this case if you've missed it, is the purchase of a restaurant. Not the original restaurant as outlined in their initial visa application, and in that I suspect is the seed of the problem.

But nevertheless a restaurant that they've worked hard to make a success. Growth, good income, plenty of staff employed. Now I am painfully aware that there will be, as there always are, mitigating and technical details that don't always get covered in the broad based appeal for clemency, or freedom, or a stay, or whatever the intention of the story is.

But, in that, I suspect is part of the problem. Is it not entirely possible common sense has gone out the window in our quest to adhere to rules, and the rules are so damn complicated you end up with too many decent cases falling through the cracks?

Making this particularly poignant, of course, is this is the first high profile case post Karel Sroubek. And as we predicted at the time, when you make such a catastrophic cock up as Iain Lees-Galloway did, you open yourself up to comparison, ridicule, and most importantly precedent. Two cases, one has residency, one doesn't.

The ones who don't have invested in our country, built a business, met (as far as I can tell) the criteria in terms of income, profit, turnover, and employment. And yet somehow they're not adding value to the country.

While the other, who does have residency, is in jail. And one assumes while he's in jail, he isn't growing a business, or employing, or expanding.

The one who doesn't have residency, as far as we know, hasn't committed crimes, hasn't lied about passports, hasn't got gang connections, isn't on the run. The other, who does have residency, does have those things.

Take migration back to its core, and ask, what is it we want? We want good, decent, hard-working people who want to make a contribution to this country, and want to provide a good, productive life in a new land.

Somehow we've taken that, added two tonnes of red tape, and got ourselves in a mess of subtlety, and nuance with the associated innocent victims to show for it.

Let's keep it simple shall we? One, Sroubek a resident. Two, the Shchetkova family not residents.

Do you think we got that one right?
